I want you to hit me as hard as you can
[Music]
hi I'm Luke Ryan for Joe Blow calm and
welcome to movie endings explained in
this video we're going to be casting our
minds back to 1976 to the psychological
drama taxi driver starring Robert De
Niro a staple of the gritty and dark
films being made in 1970s American
cinema the film follows a disillusioned
veteran Travis Bickle he takes up work
as a taxi driver in New York City
preferring to work long night shifts he
has trouble sleeping and is disgusted
with the state of the city spending his
nights driving through what he perceives
to be the garbage of the streets the
pimps the crime prostitution he detests
all of it not only as Travis
disillusioned he's disconnected an
insular person who only shares his real
feelings with a journal he keeps the
entries of which we hear in voiceover
narration throughout the film when it
comes to real human contact and social
interaction Travis struggles in the
first half of the film he tries
romancing Betsy played by Cybill
Shepherd and what already starts out as
a creepy and somewhat unsettling
introduction ends quite quickly with
Travis's poor choice of a first date
taking Betsy to a porn theater she
promptly dumps him leaving Travis
feeling even more embittered he
eventually begins to form a twisted plan
to assassinate senator Palantine a
presidential candidate and begins
training himself for this act he
acquires guns lots of guns and visits a
rally to perfect his plot staking out
the situation at the same time he
encounters iris a young prostitute
played by Jodie Foster he's appalled by
her situation and wants to rescue her
from it but she insists to Travis that
she's better off than being with her
parents when Travis finally decides to
make his move against Palantine he turns
up to a rally with his hair shaved into
the iconic mohawk look that's so
associated with the film but ultimately
he gets cold feet when he spied by a
Secret Service agent and leaves the
rally as if Travis somehow thought to
himself well I've got to kill someone
today he goes to the brothel the iris
works out and kills them all in a grisly
and graphic shootout in his mind saving
iris from a life of prostitution as he
makes his way to irises
room Travis gets shot multiple times and
ends up slumped on a sofa as the police
make their way inside what follows is a
slow and dread filled exit of the room
first in a dreamy overhead shots then
through the blood drenched holes until
we reach the street outside
[Music]
then we see presumably Travis's wool
adorned with newspaper clippings
praising his actions proclaiming him to
be the taxi-driver hero
we then hear irisa's father thanking
Travis for effectively giving them back
their daughter in a letter that we
eventually see come into frame on
Travis's wall
the very last scene though sees Travis
seemingly back to normal with a full
head of hair and driving his taxi yet
again then he picks up Betsy who now
doesn't seem quite so repulsed by him as
the movie reaches its conclusion
[Music]
how much was it
and so the film ends with Travis's view
of the city gliding across the screen so
what's there to explain I hear you ask
well as I say in every video and
outright explanation is impossible in
the subjective nature of cinema but
there are a few things that dig into
here the popular theory is that
everything after the brothel shootout is
a dream
Travis's last thoughts as he dies
imagining that he survives and ends up
right back where he was driving his taxi
but lauded as a hero for cleaning up the
trash of the city and with Betsey more
open to him again it's almost a
storybook ending for a film so full of
raw an uncomfortable darkness even
though iris was in a bad situation she
openly expresses how she isn't
interested in going back with her
parents that's what Travis wanted he
sees himself as a hero and the ending
fulfills that warped perspective you'd
think a man in the military jacket with
a mohawk killing three men the same day
that a man in a military jacket with a
mohawk was seen acting suspiciously at
the Palantine rally would raise some red
flags but at the very least he'd go to
jail for the murders but no he walks
free and instead of being viewed as a
psychopath society Pat's him on the back
and everything is fine again the great
Roger Ebert once talked about the idea
of taxi drivers ending being a fantasy
inside Travis's head saying are we
experiencing his dying thoughts can the
sequence be accepted as literally true
I'm not sure there can be an answer to
these questions the end sequence plays
like music not drama
and indeed the music that plays over
that moment is an overwhelming piece
that is incredibly evocative the
overhead shot could be seen to resemble
Travis's soul as tarnished and corrupted
as it is gliding over the room and
leaving this world he does in fact
attempt to kill himself at the end burrs
run out of bullets instead settling on a
grim miming of the act that has also
become part of the iconography of this
film throughout the movie Travis is not
only critical of the criminals of New
York City but black people in general
while it isn't leaned into completely he
is absolutely portrayed as racist which
just adds to the image of this alienated
monster disintegrating before our
in the original script written by Paul
Schrader the pimp who controls iris who
is played by Harvey Keitel in the film
was black as was every person inside the
brothel in the original script it was
just a racist slaughter Schrader said
the producers were worried the ending
the film with Travis killing only black
men would incite riots and caused
real-life violence and conflicts but
would that original detail of the ending
have added or taken away from the
concept of the film concluding with
Travis alive as a hero or dead as a
monster because if you take the ending
of taxi driver at face value we're faced
with a very dangerous and violent man
who becomes a vigilante of sorts and
comes out of it as a good guy let's not
forget his original plan was to kill
Palantine which is a completely
different situation than taking out the
people who are exploiting and abusing
iris but the moral questions that taxi
driver raises that would have kept
people coming back to the film again and
again and it being considered one of the
great films of the 1970s there is no
easy answer but there is also no denying
the fact that Travis Bickle is a
fascinating and at times terrifying
character I think a real turning point
of the story and maybe the most
important scene in the film is when
Travis tries to talk to a co-worker
wizard about the isolation he's feeling
and the bad ideas he's been having he's
simply unable to express himself to
people and just as he's trying to open
up Wizards steamrolls the moment with
bad advice at this point Travis at least
wanted to reach out to someone but even
then the only person he felt he could do
that with was a co-worker he barely
knows from here on out he really
descends into a dark place and we can
see progressively how deeper he slips he
resents the people of the city and views
them as scum at the beginning of the
film he talks about how pure and
innocent Betsy is in his mind and that
they cannot touch her but when she
rejects him he explodes and tells her
she's just like all the rest it's easy
to see why people view the ending as a
fantasy because his entire life is
viewed through such a distorted lens to
begin with but what did the key players
have to say the director Martin Scorsese
seems to read the story at face value
that Travis survived the shooter and the
final scenes are for want of a better
term true in the last moment before the
credits we see Travis looking
to his rearview mirror as if he spots
something but of course all he can see
staring right back at him are his own
eyes
halfway through the credits there's also
a few frames of his eyes looking into
the mirror tucked away in a literal
blink and you'll miss it moment here's
what Scorsese had to say about this in
the audio commentary that originally
appeared on the 1990 laserdisc release
of taxi driver and at the end of it I
decided I put something on that shows
that the time the timer starts to tick
again in Travis the one that's about to
explode the bomb starts to tick again
right about here let me show you right
here
as if he saw something in the mirror
the writer of the film Paul Schrader
however is very clear on the ending in a
reddit Q&A he said the epilogue is not a
dream sequence it's just the restarting
of the movie I've always felt that the
last frame could be spliced into the
first frame and the movie started all
over again however you are right to say
the good movies leave themselves open
for interpretation Robert DeNiro also
believes the ending is literal and was
pushing for many years for a sequel
saying I'd like to see where Travis is
today there was something about the guy
all that rage and alienation that's what
the city can do to you Paul Schrader had
said DeNiro suggested the sequel to
Marty and I about 15 years ago and I
told him it was the dumbest idea that
I'd ever heard I told him that character
had died not more than six months after
the movie was over he was on a death
trip and was going to succeed the next
time so as far as the creators of this
story are concerned the ending was no
dream and says perhaps more about the
kind of society that would celebrate
Travis a psychotic gunman than it does
about Travis's in a turmoil Paul
Schrader was confused when Sara Jane
Moore was put on the cover of Newsweek
after she had attempted to assassinate
President Ford and the cult of criminal
celebrity seeped into his screenplay for
taxi driver with Travis now hailed as a
hero by the very city he despises and
hoped the rain would wash away
[Music]
so all told the ending of the film seems
to be fairly clear-cut
and that everything you see as bizarre
as it can be is the story being told
literally I often find that dying death
dream theories hold little water but I
will concede that things do play out a
little too neatly for Travis in taxi
drivers final moments but the idea that
everything we saw was real and this
angry alienated and very dangerous man
is back on track to explode in another
violent episode is altogether a much
more uneasy and disturbing ending than
the finale being a fantasy but after all
good movies do leave themselves open to
interpretation so what do you think
[Music]
you